Asyncify blog post (#4969)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/asyncify/index.md

---
title: Using asynchronous web APIs from WebAssembly
description: Learn how to invoke asynchronous web APIs when compiling traditionally synchronous languages to WebAssembly.

> date: # TODO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2021-04-22
```

invocation:

```rust
fn main() {
    let s = std::fs::read_to_string("name.txt");
    println!("Hello, {}!", s);
}
```

But what happens when you try to compile any of those samples to WebAssembly and translate them to
the web? Or, to provide a specific example, what could "file read" operation translate to? It would
need to read data from some storage.

## Asynchronous model of the web

The web has a variety of different storage options you could map to, such as in-memory storage (JS
objects), [`localStorage`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/localStorage),
[IndexedDB](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/IndexedDB_API), server-side storage,
and a new [File System Access API](https://web.dev/file-system-access/).

However, only two of those APIs—the in-memory storage and the localStorage—can be used
synchronously, and both are the most limiting options in what you can store and for how long. All
the other options provide only asynchronous APIs.

This is one of the core properties of executing code on the web: any time-consuming operation, which
includes any I/O, has to be asynchronous.

> The reason is that the web is historically single-threaded, and any user code that touches the UI,

Author: Makes sense, thanks. I usually use the same rule, but something went wrong here 😅

it like this:

```cpp
#include <stdio.h>
#include <emscripten.h>

EM_JS(void, async_sleep, (int seconds), {
    Asyncify.handleSleep(wakeUp => {
        setTimeout(wakeUp, seconds * 1000);
    });
});
…
puts("A");
async_sleep(1);
puts("B");
```

[`EM_JS`](https://emscripten.org/docs/api_reference/emscripten.h.html?highlight=em_js#c.EM_JS) is a
macro that allows defining JavaScript snippets as if they were C functions. Inside, use a function
[`Asyncify.handleSleep()`](https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/asyncify.html#making-async-web-apis-behave-as-if-they-were-synchronous)
which tells Emscripten to suspend the program and provides a `wakeUp()` handler that should be
called once the asynchronous operation has finished. In the example above, the handler is passed to
`setTimeout()`, but it could be used in any other context that accepts callbacks. Finally, you can
call `async_sleep()` anywhere you want just like regular `sleep()` or any other synchronous API.

When compiling such code, you need to tell Emscripten to activate the Asyncify feature. Do that by
passing `-s ASYNCIFY` as well as [`-s ASYNCIFY_IMPORTS=[func1,

> func2]`](https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/asyncify.html#more-on-asyncify-imports) with a
> comma-separated list of functions that might be asynchronous.

Author: ```suggestion
func2]`](https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/asyncify.html#more-on-asyncify-imports) with an
array-like list of functions that might be asynchronous.
```

```shell
emcc -O2 \
    -s ASYNCIFY \
    -s ASYNCIFY_IMPORTS=[async_sleep] \
    ...
```

This lets Emscripten know that any calls to those functions might require saving and restoring the
state, so the compiler will inject supporting code around such calls.

Now, when you execute this code in the browser you'll see a seamless output log like you'd expect,
with B coming after a short delay after A.

```text
A
B
```

You can [return values from
Asyncify](https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/asyncify.html#returning-values) functions too. What
you need to do is return the result of `handleSleep()`, and pass the result to the `wakeUp()`
callback. For example, if, instead of reading from a file, you want to fetch a number from a remote
resource, you can use a snippet like the one below to issue a request, suspend the C code, and

> resume once the response body is retrieved—all done seamlessly as if the call was synchronous.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
resume once the response body is retrieved—all done seamlessly as if the call were synchronous.
```

asynchronous operation is scheduled, Asyncify saves all the locals, and unwinds the stack by
returning from each function all the way to the top, this way giving control back to the browser
event loop.

Then, once `async_sleep()` resolves, Asyncify support code will change `mode` to `REWINDING`, and
call the function again. This time, the "normal execution" branch is skipped - since it already did
the job last time and I want to avoid printing "A" twice - and instead it comes straight to the
"rewinding" branch. Once it's reached, it restores all the stored locals, changes mode back to
"normal" and continues the execution as if the code were never stopped in the first place.

### Transformation costs

Unfortunately, Asyncify transform isn't completely free, since it has to inject quite a bit of
supporting code for storing and restoring all those locals, navigating the call stack under
different modes and so on. It tries to modify only functions marked as asynchronous on the command
line, as well as any of their potential callers, but that still might result in approximately 50 percent overhead to the

> uncompressed code size.

Author: Hm, it sounds fine to me, but then, admittedly, I don't have Anglophone ears so I trust your judgment :) If you have a better suggestion, I'd be happy to accept it to unblock this.

> uncompressed code size.

Author: Ping? This post has been in review for 2 months now, and if there are any specific last suggestions, I'm happy to accept them, just to make sure it's published.

> uncompressed code size.

Reviewer: I also don't quite understand where the performance hit will show up but I think the general message is clear enough: there may be performance costs to using Asyncify

> different modes and so on. It tries to modify only functions marked as asynchronous on the command
> line, as well as any of their potential callers, but that still might result in approximately 50 percent overhead to the
> uncompressed code size.

Author: @kaycebasques Just one more attempt, if this doesn't work either, I'll leave it as-is. What do you think?

```suggestion
different modes and so on. It tries to modify only functions marked as asynchronous on the command
line, as well as any of their potential callers, but the code size overhead still adds up to approximately 50% before compression.
```

a single thread.

The important thing to remember about this mechanism is that, while your custom JavaScript (or
WebAssembly) code executes, the event loop is blocked and, while it is, there is no way to react to
any external handlers, events, I/O, etc. The only way to get the I/O results back is to register a
callback, finish executing your code, and give the control back to the browser so that it can keep
processing any pending tasks. Once I/O is finished, your handler will become one of those tasks and
will get executed.

For example, if you wanted to rewrite the samples above in modern JavaScript and decided to read a
name from a remote URL, you would use Fetch API and async-await syntax:

```js
async function main() {
  let response = await fetch("name.txt");
  let name = await response.text();
  console.log("Hello, %s!", name);
}
```

Even though it looks synchronous, under the hood each `await` is essentially syntax sugar for
callbacks:

```js
function main() {
  return fetch("name.txt")
    .then(response => response.text())
    .then(name => console.log("Hello, %s!", name));
}
```

> From the desugared example, it's a bit clearer that it starts a request and subscribes to the
> response with the first callback. Once the browser receives the initial response—just the HTTP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, which is a bit clearer, a request is started and responses are subscribed to with the first callback. Once the browser receives the initial response—just the HTTP
```

Author: I'd like to keep "de-sugared" here to reiterate that it's not a new example, but a de-sugared version of the previous one. How does this sound?

```suggestion
In this de-sugared example, which is a bit clearer, a request is started and responses are subscribed to with the first callback. Once the browser receives the initial response—just the HTTP
```

Reviewer 2: Your rewrite looks good.

---
title: Using asynchronous Web APIs from WebAssembly
description: Learn how to invoke asynchronous Web APIs when compiling traditionally synchronous languages to WebAssembly.
date: # TODO
hero: image/9oK23mr86lhFOwKaoYZ4EySNFp02/3XqfQyjjfxEw8T3azz0W.jpg
alt: A crosswalk signal asking to wait.
authors:
  - rreverser
tags:
  - blog # blog is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - webassembly
  - file-system
---

The I/O APIs on the Web are asynchronous, but they're synchronous in most system languages. When
compiling code to WebAssembly, you need to bridge one kind of APIs to another - and this bridge is
Asyncify.

---

> 

Reviewer 2: Please reword it.

## I/O in system languages

> Let's start by taking a look at a simple example in C. Let's say, you want to read user's name from

Author: The intent of the article is to be read as if I'm walking with the reader through the process where we try and make something work together. Hence most usages of "we" except for places where I explain what they might want / not want ("you" in those places).

Replacing all those "we" with "I" / "you" creates an unnecessary division and changes the tone of the article to something very different from the intended workshop-like walkthrough.

> Let's start by taking a look at a simple example in C. Let's say, you want to read user's name from

Reviewer 2: I get what you're trying to do, but 'we' is not absolutely necessary to creating a conversational tone. Addressing the reader directly ('you') is adequate. 

Also, this is part of the requirements for web.dev: https://web.dev/handbook/grammar/#instructions

    memory and disk accesses to locate the file, check permissions, open it for reading, and then
    read block by block until the requested number of bytes is retrieved. This can be pretty slow,
    depending on the speed of your disk and the requested size.
  - Or, the input file might be located on a mounted network location—in which case the network
    stack will now be involved too, increasing the complexity, latency and number of potential
    retries for each operation.
  - Finally, even printf is not guaranteed to print things to the console and might be redirected to
    a file or a network location, in which case it would have to go via the same steps above.

Long story short, I/O can be slow and you can't predict how long a particular call will take by a
quick glance at the code. While that operation is running, your whole application will appear frozen
and unresponsive to the user.

This is not limited to C or C++ either. Most system languages present all the I/O in a form of
synchronous APIs. For example, if you translate the example to Rust, the API might look simpler, but

> the same principles apply. You just make a call and synchronously wait for it to return the result,

Author: > I almost suggested 'procedures'. The point is that I think you need something more descriptive of activity than 'principles'.

How about "but the workflow is similar"?

while it performs all the expensive operations and eventually returns the result back to you in a
single invocation:

```rust
fn main() {
    let s = std::fs::read_to_string("name.txt");

>     println!("Hello, {}!", s);

Author: Huh, I wonder what happened here...

Author: ```suggestion
    println!("Hello, {}!", s);
```

}
```

But what happens when you try to compile any of those samples to WebAssembly and translate them to

> the Web? Or, to provide a specific example, what could "file read" operation translate to? It would

Author: I think it's more of a "could" than "would", because there are many possibilities, and the one I'm describing is not the one currently used in toolchains.

> need to read data from some storage.

Author: Which part of the statement?

## Asynchronous model of the Web

The Web has a variety of different storage options you could map to, such as in-memory storage (JS

> objects), localStorage, IndexedDB, server-side storage, and a new [File System Access

Author: > Can you provide links to these as well? Is localStorage actually Window.localStorage?

I mean, it does live on `window`, but it's commonly accessed as a global `localStorage` object.

> I think this is the first time I've heard of an in-memory object instance referred to as storage.

It's somewhat common to use storage backed by memory (like filesystem emulation for Wasm like described in this article, or general RAM disks or other similar implementations).

> objects), localStorage, IndexedDB, server-side storage, and a new [File System Access

Author: ```suggestion
objects), [`localStorage`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/localStorage), [IndexedDB](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/IndexedDB_API), server-side storage, and a new [File System Access
```

API](https://web.dev/file-system-access/).

However, only two of those APIs—the in-memory storage and the localStorage—can be used
synchronously, and both are the most limiting options in what you can store and for how long. All
the other options provide only asynchronous APIs.

This is one of the core properties of executing code on the Web: any time-consuming operation, which
includes any I/O, has to be asynchronous.

The reason is that the Web is historically single-threaded, and any user code that touches the UI,
has to run on the same thread as the UI. It has to compete with the other important tasks like
layout, rendering and event handling for the CPU time. You wouldn't want a piece of JavaScript or
WebAssembly to be able to start a "file read" operation and block everything else—the entire tab,

> or, in the past, the entire browser—for a range from milliseconds to a few seconds, until it's over.

Author: I don't think there are any browsers where this is still true... Last one was IE AFAIK.

Instead, code is only allowed to schedule an I/O operation together with a callback to be executed
once it's finished. Such callbacks are then executed as part of the browser's event loop. I won't be

> going into details here, but if you're interested in learning how event loop works under the hood,

Author: `the` makes more sense in that case

```suggestion
going into details here, but if you're interested in learning how the event loop works under the hood,
```

check out Jake Archibald's
[article](https://jakearchibald.com/2015/tasks-microtasks-queues-and-schedules/) which explains this
topic in-depth.

The short version is that the browser runs all the pieces of code in sort of an infinite loop, by
taking them from the queue one by one. When some event is triggered, the browser queues the
corresponding handler, and on the next loop iteration it's taken out from the queue and executed.

> This mechanism allows to simulate concurrency and run lots of parallel operations while still using

Author: The sentence doesn't sound correct after rewording (particularly, "and run").

> This mechanism allows to simulate concurrency and run lots of parallel operations while still using

Author: I see. Looking at the sentence, it seems like it became harder to read / more complex due to extra indirection than the original. Is this change necessary to accomodate the guidelines?

> This mechanism allows to simulate concurrency and run lots of parallel operations while still using

Reviewer 2: My suggestion was a little funky so I've edited it. The original is grammatically incorrect, so it has to change.

> This mechanism allows to simulate concurrency and run lots of parallel operations while still using

Author: That sounds better, added.

a single thread.

The important thing to remember about this mechanism is that, while your custom JavaScript (or
WebAssembly) code executes, the event loop is blocked and, while it is, there is no way to react to
any external handlers, events, I/O etc. The only way to get the I/O results back is to register a
callback, finish executing your code, and give the control back to the browser so that it could keep
processing any pending tasks. Once I/O is finished, your handler will become one of those tasks and
will get executed.

For example, if you wanted to rewrite the samples above in modern JavaScript and decided to read a
name from a remote URL, you would use Fetch API and async-await syntax:

```js
async function main() {
  let response = await fetch("name.txt");
  let name = await response.text();
  console.log("Hello, %s!", name);
}
```

However, even though it looks synchronous, under the hood each `await` is essentially a syntax sugar
for callbacks:

```js
function main() {
  return fetch("name.txt")
    .then(response => response.text())
    .then(name => console.log("Hello, %s!", name));
}
```

> From the desugared example, it's a bit clearer that it starts a request and subscribes to the

Author: I wasn't referring to `fetch()` but to the example itself. `fetch` on its own doesn't subscribe to the response, so updated version of the sentence would be incorrect.

> From the desugared example, it's a bit clearer that it starts a request and subscribes to the

Reviewer 2: >it's a bit clearer that **it** starts

The problem I was trying to fix is that I don't know what the second 'it' refers to.

response with the first callback. Once the browser receives the initial response—just the HTTP

> headers—it asynchronously invokes this callback. The callback stars reading the body as text using

Author: It's important to explain why we need a separate step/callback, as I know this sometimes confuses readers less familiar with `fetch` - that reason is that HTTP headers arrive in a separate step from the actual body.

> `response.text()`, and subscribes to the result with another callback. Finally, once `fetch` has

Author: Is "via" meant to be instead of "using"? The proposed change would result in "using via", I don't think it's correct?

> `response.text()`, and subscribes to the result with another callback. Finally, once `fetch` has

Reviewer 2: I took another shot at this. It's in a different comment (because it affects more lines) so I'm closing this.

retrieved all the contents, it invokes the last callback, which prints "Hello, (username)!" to the
console.

Thanks to the asynchronous nature of those steps, the original function can return control to the
browser as soon as the I/O has been scheduled, and leave the entire UI responsive and available for
other tasks, including rendering, scrolling and so on while the I/O is executing in background.

As another final example, even simple APIs like "sleep" that allow to wait a specified number of
seconds, are also a form of an I/O:

```cpp
#include <stdio.h>
#include <unistd.h>
// ...
printf("A\n");
sleep(1);
printf("B\n");
```

Sure, you could translate it in a very straightforward manner that would block the current thread

> until the time expires…

Author: Do you think this is necessary? I was trying to make this look as a single uninterrupted sentence.

> until the time expires…

Reviewer 2: In English ellipses indicate breaks in quotes where some part has been excised. You're introducing a code sample. That requires a colon.

```js
console.log("A");
for (let start = Date.now(); Date.now() - start < 1000;);
console.log("B");
```

…and, in fact, that's exactly what Emscripten does in [its default implementation of
"sleep",](https://github.com/emscripten-core/emscripten/blob/16d5755a3f71f27d0c67b8d7752f94844e56ef7c/src/library_pthread_stub.js#L47-L52)
but that's very inefficient, will block the entire UI, won't allow any other events to get handled

> meanwhile, and, generally, don't do that in production code :)

Author: :(

> meanwhile, and, generally, don't do that in production code :)

Author: But, if we split it this way, then we probably need "and" instead of comma before "won't allow..." above.

Instead, a more idiomatic version of such "sleep" in JavaScript would involve calling
`setTimeout()`, and subscribing with a handler:

```js
console.log("A");
setTimeout(() => {
    console.log("B");
}, 1000);
```

What's common for all those different examples and APIs? In each case, the idiomatic code in the
original systems language uses a blocking API for the I/O, whereas an equivalent example for the Web
uses an asynchronous API instead. When compiling to the Web, you need to somehow transform between

> those two execution models, and WebAssembly has no built-in capability to do so just yet.

Author: Yes, there are plans and proposals.

## Bridging the gap with Asyncify

This is where [Asyncify](https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/asyncify.html) comes in. Asyncify is a
compile-time feature supported by Emscripten, that allows pausing the entire program and
asynchronously resuming it later.

{% Img src="image/9oK23mr86lhFOwKaoYZ4EySNFp02/VSMrdTiQ7PubW6vfE6WZ.svg", alt="A call graph describing a JavaScript -> WebAssembly -> Web API -> async task invocation, where Asyncify connects the result of the async task back into WebAssembly",
width="800", height="200" %}

### Usage in C / C++ with Emscripten

> If you wanted to use it to implement an asynchronous sleep for the last example, you could do it

Author: Asyncify mentioned in the previous sentence.

> If you wanted to use it to implement an asynchronous sleep for the last example, you could do it

Author: ```suggestion
If you wanted to use Asyncify to implement an asynchronous sleep for the last example, you could do it
```

like this:

```cpp
#include <stdio.h>
#include <emscripten.h>

EM_JS(void, async_sleep, (int seconds), {
    Asyncify.handleSleep(wakeUp => {
        setTimeout(wakeUp, seconds * 1000);
    });
});
…
puts("A");
async_sleep(1);
puts("B");
```

Here, [`EM_JS`](https://emscripten.org/docs/api_reference/emscripten.h.html?highlight=em_js#c.EM_JS)
is a macro that allows defining JavaScript snippets as if they were C functions. Inside, use a
function
[`Asyncify.handleSleep()`](https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/asyncify.html#making-async-web-apis-behave-as-if-they-were-synchronous)

> which tells Emscripten to suspend the program and provides a `wakeUp()` handler that should be

Author: There is now two mentions of Emscripten in a row, I'd need to replace second one with "it" to make it easier to read. Would it be better than the current sentence though?

> called when the asynchronous operation has finished. In the example above, we pass that handler to

Author: ```suggestion
called once the asynchronous operation has finished. In the example above, the handler is passed to
```

> `setTimeout()`, but it could be used in any other context that accepts callbacks. Finally, we call

Author: "handler", mentioned 2 words ago.

the `async_sleep()` function anywhere we want just like regular `sleep()` or any other synchronous
API.

When compiling such code, you need to tell Emscripten to activate the Asyncify feature. Do that by
passing `-s ASYNCIFY` as well as [`-s ASYNCIFY_IMPORTS=[func1,
func2]`](https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/asyncify.html#more-on-asyncify-imports) with a

> comma-separated list of functions that might be asynchronous.

Author: Idk, I feel like for "array literal" I would need to clarify which language it's in, but it's not JS or JSON or anything like that... Maybe I still could, just not sure.

```shell
emcc -O2 \
    -s ASYNCIFY \
    -s ASYNCIFY_IMPORTS=[async_sleep] \
    ...
```

This lets Emscripten know that any calls to those functions might require saving and restoring the
state, so the compiler will inject a supporting code around such calls.

Now, when you execute this
code in the browser you'll see a seamless output log like you'd expect, with B coming after a short
delay after A.

> ```text

Reviewer 2: Because `puts()` writes to stdout.

> ```text

Author: More precisely, to browser console or Node.js console when compiled with Emscripten as I do. Either way, it's a plain text and should be never highlighted, so `text` is more appropriate here.

A
B
```

You can [return values from
Asyncify](https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/asyncify.html#returning-values) functions too. What
you need to do is return the result of `handleSleep`, and pass the result to the `wakeUp()`
callback. For example, if, instead of reading from a file, you want to fetch some numeric answer

> from a remote resource, you can use a snippet like below to issue a request, suspend the C code, and

Author: Maybe rather

```suggestion
from a remote resource, you can use a snippet like the one below to issue a request, suspend the C code, and
```

resume once the response body is retrieved—all done seamlessly as if the call was synchronous.

```js
EM_JS(int, get_answer, (), {
     return Asyncify.handleSleep(wakeUp => {
        fetch("answer.txt")
            .then(response => response.text())
            .then(text => wakeUp(Number(text)));
    });
});
puts("Getting answer...");
int answer = get_answer();
printf("Answer is %d\n", answer);
```

> In fact, for Promise-based APIs like `fetch()`, you can even combine Asyncify with JavaScript

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In fact, for Promise-based APIs like `fetch()`, you can even combine Asyncify with JavaScript's
```

async-await feature instead of using the callback-based API. For that, instead of
`Asyncify.handleSleep()`, call `Asyncify.handleAsync()`. Then, instead of having to schedule a
`wakeUp()` callback, you can pass an `async` JavaScript function and use `await` and `return`
inside, making code look even more natural and synchronous, while not losing any of the benefits of
the asynchronous I/O.

```js
EM_JS(int, get_answer, (), {
     return Asyncify.handleAsync(async () => {
        let response = await fetch("answer.txt");
        let text = await response.text();
        return Number(text);
    });
});

int answer = get_answer();
```

#### Awaiting complex values

> But this example still limits you only to numbers. What if you want to implement our original

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But this example still limits you only to numbers. What if you want to implement my original
```

Author: ```suggestion
But this example still limits you only to numbers. What if you want to implement the original
```

> example, where we tried to get a user's name from a file as a string? Well, you can do that too!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
example, where I tried to get a user's name from a file as a string? Well, you can do that too!
```

Emscripten provides a feature called

> [Embind](https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/connecting_cpp_and_javascript/embind.html), that allows

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Embind](https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/connecting_cpp_and_javascript/embind.html) that allows
```

you to handle conversions between JavaScript and C++ values. It has support for Asyncify as well, so

> you can call `.await()` on external `Promise`s and it will act just like `await` in an async-await

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you can call `await()` on external `Promise`s and they will act just like `await` in async-await
```

Author: 1) Isn't `.` better because it shows that it's a method not a bare function like in all other examples we've shown so far?
2) it's "it", as in `.await()`, not "they" as in "Promises".

Reviewer 2: 1. This is the convention. I've never heard of it causing confusion.
2. My bad. Fixed.

JavaScript code:

```cpp
val fetch = val::global("fetch");
val response = fetch(std::string("answer.txt")).await();
val text = response.call<val>("text").await();
auto answer = text.as<std::string>();
```

When using this method, you don't even need to pass `ASYNCIFY_IMPORTS` as a compile flag, as it's
already included by default.

Okay, so this all works great in Emscripten. What about other toolchains and languages?

### Usage from other languages

> Let's say you have a similar synchronous call somewhere in our Rust code that you want to map to an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Say that you have a similar synchronous call somewhere in your Rust code that you want to map to an
```

async API on the Web. Turns out, you can do that too!

> First of all, you need to define such a function as a regular import via `extern` block (or your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, you need to define such a function as a regular import via `extern` block (or your
```

let answer = get_answer();
println!("Answer is {}", answer);
```

And compile your code to WebAssembly:

```shell
cargo build --target wasm32-unknown-unknown
```

Now you need to instrument the WebAssembly file with code for storing/restoring the stack. For C /
C++, Emscripten would do this for us, but it's not used here, so the process is a bit more manual.

Luckily, the Asyncify transform itself is completely toolchain-agnostic. It can transform arbitrary
WebAssembly files, no matter which compiler it's produced by. The transform is provided separately
as part of the `wasm-opt` optimiser from the [Binaryen
toolchain](https://github.com/WebAssembly/binaryen) and can be invoked like this:

```shell
wasm-opt -O2 --asyncify \
      --pass-arg=asyncify-imports@env.get_answer \
      [...]
```

Pass `--asyncify` to enable the transform, and then use `--pass-arg=…` to provide a comma-separated
list of asynchronous functions, where the program state should be suspended and later resumed.

All that's left is to provide supporting runtime code that will actually do that—suspend and resume
our code. Again, in the C / C++ case this would be included by Emscripten, but now we need custom

> JavaScript glue code that would handle arbitrary WebAssembly files. We've created a library just for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
JavaScript glue code that can handle arbitrary WebAssembly files. We've created a library just for
```

Reviewer 2: 'We' is OK in this case.

that.

You can find it on Github at
[https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/asyncify](https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/asyncify) or npm

> under the name [`asyncify-wasm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/asyncify-wasm)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
under the name [`asyncify-wasm`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/asyncify-wasm).
```

It simulates a standard [WebAssembly instantiation
API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/WebAssembly), but under its own namespace. The only
difference is that, under a regular WebAssembly API you can only provide synchronous functions as
imports, while under the Asyncify wrapper, you can provide asynchronous imports as well:

```js

> let … = await Asyncify.instantiateStreaming(fetch('app.wasm'), {

Reviewer 2: Please put an actual variable name here.

Author: ```suggestion
const { instance } = await Asyncify.instantiateStreaming(fetch('app.wasm'), {
```

    env: {
        async get_answer() {
            let response = await fetch("answer.txt");
            let text = await response.text();
            return Number(text);
        }
    }
});
…
await instance.exports.main();
```

> Once you try to call such asynchronous function - like `get_answer()` in the example above - from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you try to call such an asynchronous function - like `get_answer()` in the example above - from
```

the WebAssembly side, the library will detect the returned `Promise`, suspend and save the state of
the WebAssembly application, subscribe to the promise completion, and later, once it's resolved,
seamlessly restore the call stack and state and continue execution as if nothing has happened.

Since any function in the module might make an asynchronous call, all the exports become potentially

> asynchronous, too, so they get wrapped as well. You might have noticed in the example above that you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
asynchronous too, so they get wrapped as well. You might have noticed in the example above that you
```

need to `await` the result of `instance.exports.main()` to know when the execution is truly
finished.

### How does this all work under the hood?

When Asyncify detects a call to one of the `ASYNCIFY_IMPORTS` functions, it starts an asynchronous
operation, saves the entire state of the application, including the call stack and any temporary

> locals, and later, when that operation is finished, restores all the memory and call stack and and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
locals, and later, when that operation is finished, restores all the memory and call stack and
```

> resumes from the exact same place and with the exact same state as if the program has never stopped.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
resumes from the exact place and with the exact state as if the program has never stopped.
```

Author: Now it's unclear which exact place / state it's referring to - something we pass as an argument or ..? IMO "same" is important to make it clear it's still the same place/state as before.

Reviewer 2: I was trying to remove some wordiness. What about removing 'exact' instead?

Author: That works.

```suggestion
resumes from the same place and with the same state as if the program has never stopped.
```

This is quite similar to async-await feature in JavaScript that I showed earlier, but, unlike the
JavaScript one, doesn't require any special syntax or runtime support from the language, and instead
works by transforming plain synchronous functions at compile-time.

For simplicity, let's take our asynchronous sleep example:

```js
puts("A");
async_sleep(1);
puts("B");
```

Asyncify takes this code and transforms it to roughly like the following (pseudo-code, real
transformation is more involved than this):

```js
if (mode == NORMAL_EXECUTION) {
    puts("A");
    async_sleep(1);
    saveLocals();
    mode = UNWINDING;
    return;
}
if (mode == REWINDING) {
    restoreLocals();
    mode = NORMAL_EXECUTION;
}
puts("B");
```

Initially `mode` is set to `NORMAL_EXECUTION`. Correspondingly, the first time such transformed code

> is executed, only the part leading up to "async_sleep" will get evaluated. As soon as the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is executed, only the part leading up to `async_sleep()` will get evaluated. As soon as the
```

asynchronous operation is scheduled, Asyncify saves all the locals, and unwinds the stack by
returning from each function all the way to the top, this way giving control back to the browser
event loop.

Then, once `async_sleep()` resolves, Asyncify support code will change `mode` to `REWINDING`, and

> call our function again. This time, the "normal execution" branch is skipped - since it already did

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
call the function again. This time, the "normal execution" branch is skipped - since it already did
```

> the job last time and we want to avoid printing "A" twice - and instead it comes straight to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the job last time and I want to avoid printing "A" twice - and instead it comes straight to the
```

"rewinding" branch. Once it's reached, it restores all the stored locals, changes mode back to

> "normal" and continues the execution as if the code was never stopped in the first place.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
"normal" and continues the execution as if the code were never stopped in the first place.
```

Reviewer 2: A conditional clause requires subjunctive mood. https://grammar.collinsdictionary.com/us/easy-learning/conditional-clauses

Author: O_o Okay...

### Transformation costs

Unfortunately, Asyncify transform isn't completely free, since it has to inject quite a bit of
supporting code for storing and restoring all those locals, navigating the call stack under
different modes and so on. It tries to modify only functions marked as asynchronous on the command

> line, as well as any of their potential callers, but that still might result in ~50% overhead to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
line, as well as any of their potential callers, but that still might result in approximately fifty percent overhead to the
```

Author: Numeric versions seems more readable IMO, do we need to spell out "50%"?

Reviewer 2: I hypercorrect. The digits should have stayed, but rest needs to be spelled out. (This site uses a more formal writing style than you would use on your own blog.)

> uncompressed code size.

Reviewer 2: >fifty percent overhead to the uncompressed code size

Should this be 'fifty percent overhead **as compared** to the uncompressed code size'.

Author: Sgtm.

```suggestion
line, as well as any of their potential callers, but that still might result in ~50% overhead as compared to the
uncompressed code size.
```

Reviewer 2: >50% overhead to the uncompressed code size

I'm having trouble working out what I'm getting 50% of. Do you mean that the asyncified code is 50% larger than the original before compression?

Author: Yes.

{% Img src="image/9oK23mr86lhFOwKaoYZ4EySNFp02/Im4hmQOYRHFcsg8UTfTR.png", alt="A graph showing code size overhead for various benchmarks, from near-0% under fine-tuned conditions to over 100% in worst cases",
width="800", height="494" %}

> It's not ideal, but in many cases acceptable when the alternative is not having the functionality

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This isn't ideal, but in many cases acceptable when the alternative is not having the functionality
```

altogether or having to make significant rewrites to the original code.

Make sure to always enable optimizations for the final builds to avoid it going even higher. You can
also check [Asyncify-specific optimization
options](https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/asyncify.html#optimizing) to reduce the overhead by
limiting transforms only to specified functions and/or only direct function calls. There is also a
minor cost to runtime performance, but it's limited to the async calls themselves. However, compared
to the cost of the actual work, it's usually negligible.

## Real-world demos

> Now that we've looked at the simple examples, let's move on to more complicated scenarios.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that you've looked at the simple examples, I'll move on to more complicated scenarios.
```

As mentioned in the beginning of the article, one of the storage options on the Web is an
asynchronous [File System Access API](https://web.dev/file-system-access/). It provides access to a
real host filesystem from a Web application.

> On the other hand, there is a de-facto standard—[WASI](https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI) - for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the other hand, there is a de-facto standard called [WASI](https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI)  for
```

WebAssembly I/O in the console and the server-side. It was designed as a compilation target for

> system languages, and exposes all sorts of filesystem and other operations in a traditional

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
system languages, and exposes all sorts of file system and other operations in a traditional
```

Author: Hm, isn't filesystem commonly written as a single word?

Reviewer 2: I'm not aware of a standard, but two words is more common web.dev than one word by about 10 to 1. Please change.

synchronous form.

What if we could map one to another? Then we could compile any application in any source language
with any toolchain supporting the WASI target, and run it in a sandbox on the Web, while still

> allowing it to operate on real user files! With Asyncify, we can do just that.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
allowing it to operate on real user files! With Asyncify, you can do just that.
```

> In this demo, I've compiled Rust [coreutils](https://github.com/RReverser/coreutils) crate with a

Reviewer 2: >I've compiled Rust crate

What?

Author: What's the question?

Reviewer 2: Is 'Rust crate' a typo?

Author: No, that's how they're called - Rust crates.

few minor patches to WASI, passed via Asyncify transform and implemented asynchronous
[bindings](https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/wasi-fs-access/blob/main/src/bindings.ts) from WASI

> to File System Access API on the JavaScript side. Once combined with xterm.js, this provides a

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what this sentence is saying.

Author: Is this resolved after linking Xterm or the issue is orthogonal to that one?

> to File System Access API on the JavaScript side. Once combined with xterm.js, this provides a

Reviewer 2: What's xterm.js? You haven't mentioned it before.

Reviewer 2: Please link to it. 

I call this a broken conceptual link. The fix is either to make it an actual link or remove it completely.

realistic shell running in the browser tab and operating on real user files - just like an actual
terminal.

{% Video src="video/9oK23mr86lhFOwKaoYZ4EySNFp02/4244yB6c9RbMCjGjP8ZW.mp4" %}

Check it out live at [https://wasi.rreverser.com/](https://wasi.rreverser.com/).

> It's not limited just to timers and filesystems, either. You can go further and use more niche APIs

Reviewer 2: Is 'It' referring to WASI or Asyncify?

Author: Asyncify, the feature in general.

Reviewer 2: Please reword this to make it clear.

on the Web.

For example, also with the help of Asyncify, it's possible to map
[libusb](https://github.com/libusb/libusb)—probably the most popular native library for working with
USB devices—to a [WebUSB API](https://web.dev/usb/), which gives asynchronous access to such devices
on the Web. Once mapped and compiled, I got standard libusb tests and examples to run against chosen
devices right in the sandbox of a Web page.

{% Img src="image/9oK23mr86lhFOwKaoYZ4EySNFp02/2rscL8dyhOVMacuq54Ad.jpg", alt="Screenshot of libusb debug output on a Web page, showing information about the connected Canon camera",
width="375", height="548" %}

It's probably a story for another blog post though.

Those examples demonstrate just how powerful Asyncify can be for bridging the gap and porting all
sorts of applications to the Web, allowing you to gain cross-platform access, sandboxing, and better

> security, all without losing in functionality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
security, all without losing functionality.
```
